---
title: "03.02 Higher English Ultimate Revision Guide"
---
# mulfok's Higher English Ultimate Revision Guide

**Contents:**
```toc
 style: number
```

*Thanks for help from:*
- Houseplant

___
## RUAE
The Higher RUAE exam is worth 30 marks - 30% of your overall grade.

The main difference with Higher and N5 RUAE is that you will be faced with ==*two* non-fiction passages==  on the *same theme* and you will get **01:30:00** for the paper.

Within the answers that you give, it is key to demonstrate:
- ==Understanding== of the ideas of the texts
- ==Analysis and Evaluation== of the writer's uses of language
- Ability to ==Summarise== information for a purpose

(If you're particularly sharp, you'll have noticed that these match up to the name RUAE!)

In order to maximise our own understanding of how to answer these questions, we'll go through them one by one, with worked examples to go.

### Understanding
#### Word Choice
When asked about a writer's word choice, you need to think carefully about why they have chosen particular words to describe a situation or convey a message to you.

Think about whether the writer is using formal or informal language, slang, dialect, emotive language, or words that generally have positive or negative connotations. (associations)

Once you have selected an individual word that you think is significant, you should try to explain the connotations of the word and why these make it a good word choice for the passage.

*Strategy:*
1. ==**Identify**== and quote an example of effective word choice.

2. ==**Explain**== the specific connotations of the word choice.

3. ==**Link back**== to the specific demands of the question.

```ad-important
REMEMBER! You do not get **any marks** for just quoting the effective word choice at Higher Level - all your marks are for your analysis so it needs to be detailed.

It is therefore a good idea to give two examples for two marks, four examples for four, etc.
```

When tackling a word choice question, you should always try to zoom in on individual words or very short phrases *(two to three words)* and analyse them fully. Then, if necessary you can pick a second example and analyse it.

_Worked Examples_

#### Imagery
Imagery, sometimes referred to as 'figures of speech' is a collective term for the imaginative techniques used by the writers to help them convey their message.

In general, the three main techniques are **similes, metaphors, and personification.**

A **simile** is a comparison in which one thing is said to be like something else. `A` is said to be like `B`. The writer will either use the word 'like' or 'as'.

A **metaphor** is a comparison in which the writer speaks about one thing as if it were something else. In a metaphor the word 'like' or 'as' are **not used.** `A` is said to be `B`. `A` **is** `B`.

An **extended metaphor** is simply a comparison which is extended over multiple lines. A writer may establish one basic comparison but then use a number of words and phrases to continue and strengthen the image.

**Personification** is a special type of metaphor in which an inanimate object is given human characteristics, moods, movements, reactions, etc.

_Strategy_
1. ==**Quote**== the image: "...".

2. ==**Identify**== which technique is being used: "...is an effective metaphor/personification/simile".

3. ==**Explain**== what is being compared to what and why it is an effective comparison, ideally using "just as...so too".

4. ==**Link back**== to the specific demands of the question, e.g. explain why the image is therefore effective/what the image shows.

_Worked Examples_

1. *The eerie silence was shattered by her scream.*

> "The eerie silence was shattered by her scream." is an effective metaphor. Just as materials like glass can be shattered, so too was the silence that filled the room. This therefore shows that the quietness of the room completely disappeared.

### Analysis/Evaluation

#### Understanding Questions 
These test you on your understanding of the meaning of the passage - *what* the writer is saying. You will need to **use your own words** to prove you understand the passage.

```ad-important
As you are in Higher English the passage may not always remind you to answer in you own words: it is expected you will know when to do this!
```

*Strategy*:
1. ==**Identify**== the words in the passage that contain the answer
2. ==**"Translate"**== the appropriate expression into your own words 
	
	*(When doing this, not rewording things as simple as 'safety barrier' can stop you from getting a mark* 😩*)*

Look carefully at the number of marks available and aim for **one point for one mark; two points for two marks, etc.**

```ad-warning
Do not lift whole phrases or sentences from the original passage: if you do you will not net any marks!
```

*Worked Examples*
1. *Explain what the writer finds 'also astonishing' about English.* **(2)**

> English has a huge vocabulary of approximately half a million words. ==*(1)*== There are equally as many words that are jargon or subject specific that are not included in any dictionary. ==*(1)*== German and French in comparison have much fewer words, with French having only about a fifth of the number of words that English does. ==*(1)*==

*(With this answer, more than two marks are available, but this is just for show)*

#### Summarising Questions
Summary questions test exactly the same skills as basic understanding questions, only this time you are being asked to sum up a larger chunk of information and translate it into your **own words.**

#### Tone Questions

Often tone questions are quite tricky to answer but what you are trying to do is to imagine a way in which the writer is saying something. We have to try to intuit the attitude or feeling conveyed by the writer.

Usually you will have to ==identify the tone of the writer==, then you must _explain_ how you got to this conclusion ==through the writer's use of language.==

```ad-warning
Avoid vague descriptions like 'negative' or 'positive'. **Be as specific as possible!**`
```

Instead, a good place to start is to decide whether the writer is being serious, light-hearted or ironic.

For example:

Serious Tones 	| Light-hearted Tones	| Ironic Tones
:-------------:	| :-------------------:	| :----------:
respectful 		| chatty 				| mocking
admiring 		| humorous				| sarcastic
reflective		| flippant 				| scathing
persuasive 		| irreverent			| tongue-in-cheek
emotive 		| friendly 				| satirical
thoughtful		| 		 				| 
effusive 		| 		 				| 
enthusiastic	| 		 				| 

*Strategy:*
1. ==**Identify**== the tone used by the writer in the lines you are directed to. *(Unless the question has already stated the tone)*
2. ==**Quote**== an example of word choice/imagery/sentence structure that helps to create this tone.
3. ==**Analyse**== the effect of your chosen technique and **explain** fully how this example creates that tone.

*Worked Examples*
1. *So why, after a decade of phone-in rows, vote-rigging accusations, and celebrity hungry wannabes with bloated egos, does the British public remain so in love with reality television?*

	Explain how the writer conveys a **tone of disapproval. (2)**

> - Word choice: "Wannabes"
> 
> - Subjective negative connotations of a subject trying to be something they won't.
> - The writer uses this word choice to describe the 'celebrity hungry wannabes' who feature on reality TV for the fame, recognition and riches of the position, rather than the experience and entertainment of being a popular personality. This use of 'wannabe' highlights the writer's disapproving tone. ==*(1)*==

2. *Yet Ireland has managed to attract its young entrepreneurs back to help drive a burgeoning economy. We must try to do likewise. We need immigrants. We cannot grow the necessary skills fast enough to fill the gap sites. We need people with energy and commitment and motivation, three characteristics commonly found among those whose circumstances prompt them to make huge sacrifices to find a new life.*

	How does the writer's use tone demonstrate her strength of feeling in these lines? **(1)**
	
> The writer uses a hectoring or urgent tone. This urgent tone is created by the author's repeated sentence pattern in four consecutive sentences: "We need... We must... We cannot... We need...". The repeated structure allows the writer to show how passionately she feels about the need for the UK to embrace immigrants. Each of the four sentences gives a powerful reason to why we should adopt this attitude to immigration, adding emphasis to the writer's argument. ==*(1)*==
	
#### Language Questions
___
## Critical Reading
In the critical reading for Higher English, you complete a *set text*, and a **timed critical essay.**

### The Scottish Set Text
(NEW)
The Set Text Is:
- Worth ==20%== of your overall mark
- ==45 minutes== to complete
- For this element of the course you will study ==6 poems== by ==Norman MacCaig==. These have been selected from the Scottish Set Text List.
- You will ==study these texts carefully==, thinking about ==features appropriate to genre== and the ==themes or issues== presented to you by the writer.
- The ==skills progression== we expect to see at Higher means the ==final question== for this paper is now worth ==10 marks== (instead of 8 as per N5) and you will have to make ==comparisons across poems== in order to answer the 10 mark question successfully

#### What does the paper look like?
- You will be given ==one of the poems or an extract of poem== from the set text list. 
- You will be expected to ==answer questions== on the poem provided.
- You will also have to be able to ==relate the ideas and language of that extract to at least one other poem studied.==

- You are ==guaranteed one of the studied poems.==
- You will NOT know which poem will come up in the exam
- There are usually ==THREE or FOUR== questions focused on the poem (10 marks)
- The last question asks you to ==compare/make links between features of the genre or ideas/themes presented==
- The last question is ==worth 10 marks== (out of a possible 20) so it is best to ==be prepared for it==

#### Approaching The Text
- Read the poem/extract through before you start, even if you know it well.
- Read the questions carefully.
- Work out exactly what they are asking before you answer
- Check how many marks each question is worth and think about how these marks will be allocated.

```ad-warning
At National 5, you were often awarded 1 mark for a relevant quote from your text and then 1 mark for a comment/analysis of that quote.

**THIS IS NOT THE CASE AT HIGHER LEVEL!**

- ==You will not be awarded any points just from quoting from the poems.==
- ==ALL OF YOUR MARKS== will come from your analysis of key features and techniques from the poems so you must make sure your analysis is ==detailed and perceptive.==
```

#### TEA...
When tackling any kind of analysis or evaluation type question, you should quote an example, name the technique(s) used in the quote and then analyse the effects of these techniques as fully as possible.

Naming the techniques will show off your knowledge to the marker and will remind you to explain the different effects of the various techniques used, encouraging you to give a more detailed answer but remember all of the marks are for the analysis no the quotes!

_Use TEA:_
- <mark style="background: #FF5582A6;">Technique</mark> 
- <mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">Evidence</mark> 
- <mark style="background: #BBFABBA6;">Analysis</mark> 

#### Understanding Questions
Much like the RUAE exam, ==understanding questions== will ask you to demonstrate that you've understood what you've read.

Typically, the main command words are generally used in this question paper:

- ==Explain (how)/identify: candidates are required to demonstrate understanding of key aspects, for example main ideas or themes==

When asked about the main ideas/concerns of the text, show your understanding of the poem's main messages/themes.

- Consider ==WHAT the writer is saying==
- ==USE your OWN WORDS== wherever possible
- Pick out ==key points== and put them in your ==own words== (summarise)
- 2 marks = 2 pieces of information, 4 marks = 4 info, etc.
- The answer ==is always== in the lines that you have been directed to
- Don't forget the obvious answers!

#### Analysis Questions
```ad-important
This is the most common kind of question.
```

Analysis questions could test your understanding of the writer's ==word choice, imagery, sentence structure or tone== _or_ could ask you more generally about the ==writer's language== in which case, it is up to you which of these language features you choose to comment on.

The following main command words are generally used in these types of questions:

- ==Analyse (how): candidates are required to demonstrate understanding of, for example: characterisation, narrative, symbolism, theme or to analyse a writer's use of language (word choice, figurative language, sentence structure, tone punctuation, sound, etc.)==

##### Tackling The Question
- There could be ==up to 6 marks== awarded in this paper for this type of question
- To answer successfully you will have to ==quote a word/image/technique== and then ==analyse fully its effect== in relation to the question/
- The number of examples you give will depend on the ==number of marks available.== To be sure of getting full marks, it is a good idea to give 2 examples for 2 marks; 4 examples for 4 marks etc.
- You can be awarded more than one mark for a single example, but your analysis would have to bee ==very detailed and convincing.==

#### Evaluation Questions
These questions are asking how well you think the writer has done something. Generally speaking, you say the writer has used language well and then go on to show how by quoting a word/technique and commenting on it.

The following main command words are generally used int hese types of questions:
- ==Evaluate: candidates are required to demonstrate understanding of the effectiveness of text structure.==

A possible evaluation question could be on:
- Effective conclusions
	- Generally, conclusions sum up the key ideas of a text and leave us with something to think about. In poetry, poets use a number of techniques to effectively conclude their work. These include: a continuation of the ideas/language/imagery from earlier in the poem' a link/echo of the opening lines; a striking/dramatic final line which highlights one of the poem's key ideas; rhetorical questions

#### The 10 Mark Question
This is the ==final question== in the set text paper. It is worth ==10 marks out of the 20== available and asks you about a ==specific technique/feature/theme/idea== used in the poem in front of you. It will then ask you to discuss ==how this is explored in at least one other poem.==

You are expected to ==compare== the poem you have in front of you with ==at least one other== you have studied by the same writer.

Your answer can be set you in ==continuous prose== (like a mini essay) or a series of ==detailed bullet points.== Bullet points are the easiest way to ensure you do not miss any of the key steps out.

The following main command words are generally used in this question:
- ==Discuss: candidates are asked to show how the writer explores a given topic/theme or uses a literary or linguistic technique, across more than one poem/short story, or a longer text in its entirety==

##### Allocation of Marks
Think about how marks are secured:
- ==2 marks== will be awarded for ==commonality== (i.e. stating clearly what is similar about the texts/aspects of the text you are comparing)
- ==2 marks== will be available for ==quoting the extract== AND then ==analysing its significance==
- ==6 marks== will be available for ==quoting from another poem(s)== studied AND ==analysing the significance of your evidence.==

Remember...

Whilst at National 5 marks were awarded for reference to the text(s), 0 marks are awarded at Higher for quotation/reference alone.

You will receive:
- ==2 marks== for ==detailed and insightful comment that includes quotation/reference to the text==
- ==1 mark== for a ==more basic comment==

It is always best to ==aim for quality over quantity==. However, if you are ==unable to write insightful or detailed comments==, it might be worth ==providing six more basic points==.

##### Organise Your Answer

Organise your answer into a series of bullet points, covering the following three steps:

<u>Step One: Commonality</u>
- This means to refer to another text and say what it has in common with the given text. This is referred to in SQA mark schemes as 'commonality' (2)

<u> Step Two: From the poem</u>
- Use ==TEA== to help you to structure your answer.

<u>Step Three: From the other poems</u>
- Refer to at least one other poem in relation to the question. (6)

##### Example Final Question
> Poem: '_Assisi'_
> 
> By referring to this poem and to at least one other poem by MacCaig that you have studied, explore the poet's use of striking imagery to highlight the poem's main concerns. (10 MARKS)

Remember how the marks were awarded:
- Commonality = 2 marks
- Extract Poem = 2 marks
- Other poems = 6 marks

> <u>_Commonality_</u>
> In "Assisi", Norman MacCaig ==uses striking imagery== to convey the vulnerable, diminutive appearance of the beggar outside the vast elaborate cathedral. ==This enables him to highlight the central concerns of the poem:== the suffering and alienation of the poor and the hypocrisy of those who claim to be honouring St Francis and his Christian principles but who ignore the suffering of someone in need.
>
> The poet also uses striking imagery in a number of his other poems, such as in "Visiting Hour" where he uses a series of metaphors to describe the ill relative he is visiting ==to highlight his message that grief and loss is a universal experience.== in “Brooklyn Cop” meanwhile, he ==uses vivid imagery== to describe the thin line between civilised behaviour and violence ==to highlight his key message== that there is always the potential for savagery within human beings.
> 
> <u>_From the poem_</u>
> Technique: metaphor
> Evidence: "It was they who had passed the ruined temple outside."
> Analysis: The beggar is compared to a temple because despite his off-petting physical appearance, he is still a valuable human being with a beautiful spirit. however, the fact he is a "ruined temple" suggests he has been beaten down in life and abandoned by those around him...
> 
> <u>_From the other poems_</u>
> In "Visiting Hour", MacCaig uses a memorable metaphor, "the hospital smell combs my nostrils" to suggest the pungent yet familiar smell of his surroundings. The smell is so strong that it overpowers him, adding to his discomfort. This allows him to explore a main concern of the poem - the suffering...

### Timed Critical Essay
Structuring the essay:
- Introduction
- **Five** Main Body Paragraphs
- A Conclusion

To make structuring each individual part of the essay easier, each section has a handy little acronym.

```ad-warning
**You WILL NOT have time to create a detailed essay plan in the actual timed critical essay.** 

You are going to have to have to learn all the quotes that you are going to need, and you will have to memorise the essay structure so that you can be ready for the exam as soon as the question paper hits your desk.
```

#### Introduction
*TARTS* - The formula for the introduction. Treat yourself to some after the essay!

_Example Questions:_
Choose a play whose main theme is made clear early in the action. Show how the dramatist introduces the theme and discuss how successfully he/she goes on to develop it.

Choose a major character from a play you have studied that ==acts in an impatient or calculating or emotional manner.== By referring to the appropriate techniques, *show how the author makes the character's manner believable.*

Title 			| e.g "Romeo and Juliet”
:-------------:	| :-:
Author 			| e.g William Shakespeare
==Reference to==| e.g Impatient Character: Romeo
==Task==		| e.g “makes character's manner believable”
**Summary** 	| e.g 1590s Italy, following the passionate love of Romeo and Juliet which lead to their demise at the end of the play.

*Example Answer:*
> A playwright which ==features an impatient character== is William Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet". **The playwright is set in Verona, Italy, in the 1590s. The playwright follows the love story of the characters Romeo and Juliet, who eventually meet their demise at the end of the play.** A character which ==I found impatient is Romeo.== He is a very lovesick character who has to learn how to 

Notes about TARTS:
-   “Reference to” and “Task” are one thing.
-   For summarising inside your plan, use single words in a list. This’ll save time.

#### Main Body Paragraphs

PEDEL - The acronym for the main body! An archaic spelling of a [beadle!](https://www.thefreedictionary.com/beadle)

Point			| A
:-------------:	| :-:
Evidence		| A
Develop			| A
Explain			| A
Link to task	| A

Notes about PEDEL: 
- Makes up the main body of your essay - important to remember
- Single words in your plan so you don't waste time

Evidence refers to a quote, make sure you use a quote

#### Conclusion
___
[Back To Top](#contents)